Cybersecurity firm Jungle Disk expands into consumer market with acquisition
Avatar photo
by Waylon Cunningham
May 25, 2022
Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
Jungle Disk CEO Bret Piatt works with Support Tech Juan Diaz in their new offices. Photo by Scott Ball.
Jungle Disk CEO Bret Piatt (right) works with Support Tech Juan Diaz. Credit: Scott Ball / San Antonio Report
San Antonio cybersecurity services firm Jungle Disk is continuing its expansion streak with the recent acquisition of a cloud company focused on personal storage.

The acquisition announced this week of ElephantDrive marks Jungle Disk’s first foray into the consumer market. ElephantDrive focuses on helping customers back up cloud storage of family photos, videos and important personal documents.

Jungle Disk CEO Bret Piatt said he’s seeking to build the world’s leading backup and disaster recovery specialists. ElephantDrive plugs the consumer gap in the company’s portfolio of products, which caters to commercial clients from small businesses up to large enterprises.

A VIA bus travels north on Broadway past the SA is Amor mural created by the Art Everywhere campaign of Centro.
WANT THE NEWS DELIVERED FOR FREE EVERY MORNING?
SIGN UP FOR THE DAILY REACH.
Enter your email
Sign up
“Backup is getting more complicated,” he said, pointing to the rapid growth of cloud-based storage. Many businesses have come to recognize the value of backup specialists who can not only restore complex systems, but do so quickly.

Jungle Disk became what is thought to be San Antonio’s second largest privately held tech company by revenue last year when it made several acquisitions of backup and recovery services described by one of the deal’s partners as being “much larger” than Jungle Disk.

Those product groups acquired last year — KeepItSafe, LiveVault and OffsiteDataSync — are, like ElephantDrive, headquartered in Los Angeles. Those acquisitions were powered by local private equity money from Dry Line Partners and Porthcawl Holdings.

Financial terms of ElephantDrive’s acquisition were not disclosed.

Jungle Disk provides a suite of cybersecurity services like data backups and password management, among others, meant to protect data from system failures, human errors and cyberattacks.

Piatt said Jungle Disk employs around 30 individuals in San Antonio and between 120 and 130 globally in offices in the Netherlands, Norway and elsewhere.

The company was founded in Atlanta in 2006 but moved to San Antonio in 2010, the year after it was acquired by Rackspace. It was bought again in 2016 by Porthcawl Holdings, who today owns it along with Dry Line Partners.

ElephantDrive CEO Michael Fisher said in a prepared statement that the acquisition of his venture would allow it to scale and further ensure “no family suffers the digital disaster of losing their treasured memories.”

ElephantDrive will operate as a separate division, with Jungle Disk Chief Revenue Officer Nick Nelson becoming chairman and chief revenue officer. Fisher will continue to lead the group.