FIFA World Cup Qatar 2022: Qatar and Ecuador eye best chance for early points
Will ignore razzmatazz of opening ceremony with way more focus than normal

Published:  November 19, 2022 16:00
Reuters
  
Copy of 492734-01-02-1668859209974
(Left) Qatar's Hassan al-Haydos and Ecuador's Enner Valencia. The World Cup finally kicks off in Qatar on Sunday at the 60,000-capacity Al Bayt Stadium, where hosts Qatar take on Ecuador.
Image Credit: AFP
World Cup debutants Qatar and South America’s lowest-qualifying nation Ecuador both know Sunday’s opener is their best chance for a win in Group A before facing much scarier rivals.

Ranked a lowly 50th and 44th in the world respectively, Qatar and Ecuador will be hard-pressed to progress as one of the top two in their group without winning at the Al Bayt Stadium, where the Middle East’s first World Cup kicks off at 8pm.

The more daunting prospects of African champions Senegal and perennial powerhouse the Netherlands await them next.

Each, however, has reason for quiet confidence.

Qatar had longer than most squads to bond during European camps, beat several Central American sides in recent friendlies, and draw self-belief from their 2019 Asian Cup title.

Though many outsiders expect Qatar to be soundly drubbed in all three games, home fans know forwards Akram Afif and Almoez Ali have both talent and experience and pray they can penetrate an Ecuador team themselves struggling to score of late.

“Obviously, I’m not talking about Qatar winning the World Cup, but competing at a good level against those three teams is our challenge,” said coach Felix Sanchez.

Recognisable names
“Then this is football, and you never know what can happen.” Ecuador are rightly favourites on Sunday, having punched their way into the fourth and last spot from arguably the world’s toughest qualifying campaign. They boast some more recognisable names than the Qataris, including Premier League midfielder Moises Caicedo and veteran striker Enner Valencia.

“Believe in us! We’re working as hard as we can to give joy to the whole nation,” said Valencia.

Both teams will seek to ignore the razzmatazz of the opening ceremony and the pressure of a vast global audience, with way more focus than normal on what would otherwise be a less-than-mouthwatering game for global spectators.

Even if they lose, Qatar will want to at least avoid humiliation and prove that they are worthy of a place.

Ecuador, too, will be relieved just to be walking out after they faced possible expulsion over an accusation of fielding an ineligible player.