Pelicans' Zion Williamson says he's 'definitely' playing Monday
ByANDREW LOPEZ via via logo
November 20, 2022, 12:59 AM

Share
METAIRIE, La. -- New Orleans Pelicans forward Zion Williamson said he expects to play Monday night when the team hosts the Golden State Warriors.

Williamson has missed three consecutive games after suffering a right foot contusion last Saturday against the Houston Rockets. Speaking after practice Saturday, Williamson said his foot was "feeling a lot better."

"As of now I can say I'm definitely playing Monday," Williamson said. "I don't see why I wouldn't at this point. Had enough time off it. The pain seems to be gone at this point."

The injury happened to the same foot Williamson broke in the summer of 2021 that caused him to miss the entire 2021-22 season. He admitted that led to some initial nerves.

"It was a moment where I was kind of scared like, 'Man, I ain't trying to go through this again. I just went through it,'" Williamson said. "But the scans were positive outside of the bruise."

Pelicans coach Willie Green said the team went through a light practice Saturday but Williamson was able to participate in everything they did.

"He went through all of our drills, all of our work, got some work in the weight room," Green said. "We'll have more of a sharper practice tomorrow and get ready for Monday's game. Excited to have him back."

Williamson has missed five games this season after missing two in October because of a right hip/lower back contusion when he took a nasty fall on a dunk attempt.

In 11 games, Williamson is averaging 23.5 points on 56.6% shooting.

Second-year forward Trey Murphy has started with Williamson out, but Murphy had to leave Friday night's loss against the Boston Celtics with soreness in his right foot after stepping on Sam Hauser's foot in the lane.

Murphy underwent imaging on the foot late Friday night, and scans came back clean. Green said Murphy will be day-to-day, and the team has diagnosed him with a right foot contusion.